Data Handling 

 

Data itself goes through its own life cycle as users create, use, share and modify it. 


Degaussing 

Process of reducing or eliminating unwanted data on disks using strong magnets. 

Data Handling Practices 

 

Classification 

Process of recognizing the organizational impacts if the information suffers any security compromises related to its characteristics of confidentiality, integrity and availability. 

Information is then labeled and handled accordingly. 

Classifications are derived from laws, regulations, contract-specified standards or other business expectations. 

Labeling 

Security labels are part of implementing controls to protect classified information. 

It is reasonable to want a simple way of assigning a level of sensitivity to a data asset, such that the higher the level, 

the greater the presumed harm to the organization, and thus the greater security protection the data asset requires. 

Data Sensitivity Levels and Labels 

Highly Restricted 

Moderately Restricted 

Low Sensitivity 

Unrestricted Public Data 

Event Logging Best Practices 

 

Ingress monitoring refers to surveillance and assessment of all inbound communications traffic and access attempts. 

Egress monitoring is used to regulate data leaving the organization’s IT environment. 

Configuration Management Overview 

 

Process and discipline used to ensure that the only changes made to a system are those that have been authorized and validated. 

It is both a decision-making process and a set of control processes. 

Identification 

Baseline identification of a system and all its components, interfaces and documentation. 

Baseline 

A security baseline is a minimum level of protection that can be used as a reference point. 

Baselines provide a way to ensure that updates to technology and architectures are subjected to the minimum understood and acceptable level of security requirements. 

Change Control 

An update process for requesting changes to a baseline, by means of making changes to one or more components in that baseline. 

A review and approval process for all changes. This includes updates and patches. 

Verification & Audit 

A regression and validation process, which may involve testing and analysis, to verify that nothing in the system was broken by a newly applied set of changes. 

An audit process can validate that the currently in-use baseline matches the sum total of its initial baseline plus all approved changes applied in sequence. 

Common Security Policies 

 

Data Handling Policy 

Password Policy 

Acceptable Use Policy (AUP) 

Bring Your Own Device (BYOD) 

Privacy Policy 

Change Management Policy 

Change Management Comportments 

Request for change 

Approval 

Rollback 

Repeat 

 

 

Chapter-4[Network Security] 
